Area Level 1|Area Conceived as Space Covered
ToMA 1A|Recognize area informally as space covered or space inside.|"The book is covering part of the desk."  "The rug covers most of the floor."
ToMA 1B|Visually and/or directly compare spaces covered|"If I put this shape on top of this one, it doesn't completely cover the bottom shape.  So, the bottom shape covers more space.' Comparing a 1 x 12 rectangle to a 4 x 3 rectangle: "The fatter one covers up more space than the skinny one does." "The long one takes up more space than the short one does." Note: Children may not consider both dimensions when comparing areas visually.
ToMA 1C|Symbolize relations among spaces covered|"Shape A = Shape B because they cover the same amount of space." A = B  "Shape A covers less space than shape B." A < B
Area Level 2|Partition and Rearrange Partitions to Compare Magnitudes of Areas.
ToMA 2A|Partition a shape into parts and re-arrange the parts to compare areas.|Note: This implies that child understands that area is unaltered by partitioning a shape and rearranging its parts (conservation). "I cut this shape into different parts and then re-arranged them like this—see I made this other shape without any leftovers—so I know that the two shapes cover the same amount of space."
ToMA 2B|Equipartition a shape and count the equipartitions to compare areas. Unit as a privileged partition.|Comparing a  rectangle to a  rectangle: "I folded the paper to make 4 of these (gestures to  partition) and then I used all 4 of them to make this one (the ). So they cover the same amount of space."
Area Level 3|Explain/Justify/ Use Unit Properties to Indirectly Compare Area Measures.
ToMA 3A|Tile an area with identical units and justify. (Or, if different units are used, they are labeled as such.)|"The units should touch so there is no empty space.  You can’t measure what you don’t cover." "The beans did not work to measure the area of my hand. They left spaces. And they weren’t all the same size, so I did not get the same number each time I tried to fit them into my handprint." "The spaghetti fit inside (the leaf outline) but I had to break it into pieces. They had different lengths and left spaces, so the spaghetti didn’t work."
ToMA 3B|Recognize and justify closure of figure as necessary for area measure.|"If the figure has an opening, the area leaks out, so you just have to keep counting and counting, so you will never stop." "All open figures have the same measure, a really big number, so it doesn’t work."
ToMA 3C|Use/recognize unit iteration.|Interpret iterated count as ratio between area of figure and area of unit.|"I ran out of tiles, so I borrowed one that I had already counted so that I could keep counting until I found the answer, which is 12 square units." "The area is 12 square units, which is 12 times the area of 1 square unit."
ToMA 3D|Qualitative inverse relation between area of unit and measure of area.|"The smaller square units will have a bigger area measure, because you can fit more inside."
ToMA 3E|Represent/construct suitable units (e.g. differentiate area and perimeter units). |"Perimeter is how long, so we use inches, but area is space inside, so we use square inches." "This line segment does not have area because it represents the distance between these two points." "I am using little squares because more of them fit inside the leaf. That means that I can count whole squares. With these big squares, I have to guess more about the parts that are outside the leaf."
ToMA 3F|Unit Structuring.|Given side lengths of a simple figure, structure area by partitioning lengths and coordinating the partitions to constitute units of area measure.|This rectangle is . So here are the 12 square inches of the area measure.
ToMA 3G|Partition unit.|Coordinate whole number and fractional units (e.g. ). "I couldn’t use whole units for these parts of the figure because they covered more space than the figure covered, so I split the units in half to find that the figure covered 25 and a half square units. Or its area is  square units"
Area Level 4|Develop Dynamic Product Conception of Area.
ToMA 4A|Generate areas by sweeping one length through another at a variety of angles, (excluding 00 and 1800). Relate sweep to multiplication for rectangles. "If this rectangle is six units long and I sweep that through the width of four units, then it would be 6in  4in = 24 square units."
ToMA 4B|Relate images of sweeping and actions of dissection to symbolic expressions of arithmetic operations and properties.|"Sweeping 3 in through 5 in makes the same area as sweeping 5 in through 3 in, so order does not matter: ." (commutative property) "If I dissect this  rectangle, I can show that , and also. "Sweeping 3in through 5in and then keep sweeping another 2 inches means: ." (the distributive property of multiplication over addition)
ToMA 4C|Extend conception and symbolization of product to include fractional lengths.|"If this rectangle is six units long, and I sweep that through the width of four and a half units, you would have 6  4.5 = 27 square units." sweep through  is 
ToMA 4D|Extend product conception of area to include finding and comparing areas with dimensions given in unlike units (e.g., length in cm, width in inches).|This rectangle is 2 Gee  3 Thompson, so the area is 6 Gee-Thompson and here are the units. "If the rectangle is 6 inches long and 4 centimeters wide, the area is 24 inch-centimeters."
ToMA 4E|Use Cavalieri’s principle to justify informally why the areas of figures with identical bases and heights are of equal measure, despite differences in appearance.|"When I swept this length (gestures to 6 in base of figure) and then moved it parallel to the base but back and forth through 5 inches, it has the same area as this one (a 6 in by 5 in rectangle) because it (gestures to back and forth figure) is just the same space pushed in and pushed out. The push in and out balances." "When I kept the base the same and moved the altitude along this line parallel to the base, all of these triangles have the same area, even though they look different." Why? "Cause you are just changing how it looks not the space it takes up."
Area Level 5|Generate, Use, and Justify Area Measure Formulas for Parallelogram, Triangle, Regular Polygon, and Circle.
ToMA 5A|Use dissection and/or Cavalieri principle to generate and justify area formula for parallelogram.|"The area formula for a parallelogram is  because if you sweep the base through the height, you get .  To check, if you took the triangle off one end of the parallelogram and put it on the other end so that it looked like a rectangle, then you would still have 6  4 = 24 square units for the area." "The parallelogram has the same base and the same height as a rectangle, so it is the same area (Cavalieri principle)."
ToMA 5B|Use dissection and/or Cavalieri principle to generate and justify area formula for a triangle.|"The area formula for a triangle is  because if you doubled the triangle and put the pieces together so that it formed a rectangle, the area formula would just be .  But since the original triangle is only half of the rectangle, it would be  of the rectangle’s area, or ."
ToMA 5C|Use dissection and area measure of triangle to generate, justify and use area formula for regular polygons.| "If you split the hexagon into six equilateral triangles, and you know that the area of each triangle is , where b = the length of the side of the hexagon, then the area of all 6 triangles is , which is the same as  because 6b is the perimeter of the hexagon. This formula works for all regular polygons, if you think of each polygon as being made of up congruent triangles."
ToMA 5D|Characterize circle as the result of a limiting process (infinitely sided n-gon) and generalize area formula for n-gon to generate and justify formula for measure of area of a circle. |The perimeter of the circle is π x 2r. That’s true because π is the ratio of the length of its circumference (its perimeter) to the length of its diameter. If you think of a circle as having many, many small sides, its area is . For a circle, h = r, so A = . This is the same as .



